

Deep convolutional neural networks (CNN) can be used to accurately predict disease in medical images. However, these models are vulnerable to developing unintended bias. Systematic review of publicly available skin image datasets revealed that very few datasets had any skin type or ethnicity information, and there was substantial underrepresentation of darker skin types. Although it is understood that training models on predominantly light skin types may impact the reliability of the prediction of skin lesions in darker skin types, this discrepancy has not been widely quantified. This experiment looks further into understanding the relationship of the Fitzpatrick skin type representation in CNN training data and its effect on predicting the presence of basal cell carcinoma (BCC), melanoma, or squamous cell carcinoma (SCC). Images from the Fitzpatrick 17k Dataset were organized into a “light skin type group” (Fitzpatrick types I, II, III), a “dark skin type group” (Fitzpatrick IV, V, VI), and an “all skin types group” were used to train a DenseNet 121 model initialized with ImageNet weights, to predict BCC melanoma, and SCC. Each model was then tested on the dark and light skin type test groups. The model trained on light skin types performed significantly better at classifying skin cancers in the light skin test group compared to the model trained on dark skin types (P<0.001). Similarly, the model trained on dark skin types performed significantly better at classifying skin cancers in the dark skin test group compared to the model trained on light skin types (P<0.001). The model trained on all skin types performed significantly better at classifying BCC in light skin patients than the model trained on dark skin patients (P=0.010). The disparate performance in area under the receiver operator characteristic curve confirms the importance of balanced training data representing all Fitzpatrick types for a CNN to fairly assess skin cancer in skin of color. 
